---
layout: post
title: MacSequel – A native MAC OSX GUI query tool for Oracle
permalink: /macsequel-a-native-osx-gui-query-tool-for-oracle
---

MacSequel – A native MAC OSX GUI query tool for Oracle
======================================================

Introducing [MacSequel – a made-for-mac-osx query tool for
oracle.](http://www.macsequel.com/) This is my first experience writing
objective-C code. This is how MacSequel looks:

![Macsequel - a native mac osx query tool for oracle](/images/macsequel-thumb.png "Macsequel - a native mac osx query tool for oracle")

I am recently working on a web-project backed primarily by Oracle
Database. Though most of my earlier projects used MySql, this is not the
first time I am working with Oracle. I’ve had so many times in the past
where a client has demanded that an app to be run on Oracle. One of the
biggest troubles I’ve had in working with Oracle is the lack of a decent
native osx client(a query tool).

During such times, every other day I actively google for a few minutes
looking for a simple native-mac GUI for oracle and then after failing to
find one, get back to SQLDeveloper. And SQLDeveloper sucks. At least on
my mac. At least for the simple things I do everyday. Takes a long time
load, consumes huge memory and just dosen’t have that “Something” that
other native Sql tools have(For eg., [Sequel
Pro](http://www.sequelpro.com/) which is a great for mysql).

So I decided to make one. I’ve been a Java(and swing) developer all my
life, so the first step was to convince myself to move away from java
for this project. Once I did that, it wasn’t that difficult. I will try
to post a few more articles or the troubles I faced which might be
useful to someone trying to write objective-c code for the first time.

I’d love your feedback. \[ kaushik dot sathupadi at gmail.com \]
