---
layout: post
title: When the drawing board screws you over
permalink: /when-the-drawing-board-screws-you-over
---

When the drawing board screws you over
======================================

I clearly remember this one time when I gave an interview. It was a
Sunday afternoon.

To my surprise, people in the company were friendly, cheerful and in
general - awesome. The moment I entered the office the CTO came out to
meet me, shook hands and took me around the office. Pretty cool.

After 20 minutes, the actual interview started in a room with me, the
CTO and 3 more. They asked me a few questions on my earlier projects,
things related to scaling, technologies I would choose and I was
answering them pretty well. Half an hour later, the CTO said, “very
well, let’s do some real coding stuff now”. I said “yeah sure”. After
all I’ve been coding for 6 years and If there is only one thing that I
could do well it was coding. At least my wife thinks that.

It was not a very complex problem. Something about building a simple
“web browser” where divs are to be aligned without overlapping. After
hearing the question I promptly started to pick out my laptop to start
to code, when the CTO said *“For the benefit of all of us in the room,
can you please try and solve it in the drawing board? Besides it’ll take
a long time to actually code, so just explain us the logic”*. So I
walked over to the drawing board.

And everything fucked up. I was like *“hmm. ok.. so I’ll create a map to
hold the positions and then..”* when somebody would interrupt and say
*“Can you think about it? A map would be terrible choice, since you have
to iterate over it”*. Later I was like *“On the third iteration of the
loop the value of ‘i’ will be 4 so the div.. umm.. hold on one second..
”*. I was loosing control. Sweating. “How can I be this dumb?”. I had
faced dozens of problems like this in my projects and I knew I could
solve this. But not now. Was it because everyone was staring at me?.
Every other 5 minutes, I would say “ok, lets start over guys, let me
start from the beginning”. After like 30 minutes I was able to
articulate something that was “acceptable”. But in my heart I knew : I
would never accept that solution if I were them.

On my way home, I felt devastated. I wasn’t as good as I thought I was.
That or something was totally wrong. On an instinct I picked up the
laptop from my bag right there on the auto-rickshaw I was traveling,
opened textmate and started coding *Browser.java*. What happened then
was totally insanely awesome. The code was flowing through my hands into
the text editor. I wasn’t even thinking about things like “What’ll be
the value of i on this iteration”, I just knew it would work. I finished
the entire code and tested it during the journey of 30 minutes. Before I
reached home I took out my data card and mailed the code to the CTO.

It was a revelation. The more I thought about it the more it made sense.
I did best what I was trained to do and I was never trained to explain
to code. Two takeaways:

-   If you are giving interviews: Understand that Coding is one thing,
    and explaining how you would code is quite another. Prepare for the
    latter
-   If you are conducting interviews: Don’t ask the candidate to explain
    the code on the drawing board. At least not before they have coded
    once on a computer. I’d say the best way would be to give the
    candidates a question, a laptop and get the hell out of the room
    until the candidates finish coding. Then discuss the code with them.
